DISCUSSION ITEMS 
 
7. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenters:  Indira  Samarasekera,  President  and  Chair,  General  Faculties  Council;  Peter  Meekison, 
Program Advisor, Leadership Initiative, and Distinguished University Professor Emeritus 
 
Purpose of the Proposal: On September 13, 2013, the University of Alberta will announce the development 
of a cross-institutional Leadership Initiative, in partnership with the Banff Centre and with the strong support 
of key community leaders. The planning for the initiative will build upon and bring together already-existing 
academic  and  co-curricular  programming  designed  to  inspire,  educate,  and  mentor  aspiring  student 
leaders  across  all  fields  of  endeavour.  How  precisely  the  programming  for  the  initiative  develops  in  the 
future will depend heavily on the vision and input of the academic community. 
 
Discussion: 
Dr Samarasekera introduced former University of Alberta Vice-President (Academic) Dr Peter Meekison to 
GFC members and welcomed him to Council. 
 
Dr Meekison, during his detailed description of the origins and aims of the ‘Leadership Initiative’, explained 
that  the  original  idea  to  create  a  program  to  educate  the  leaders  of  tomorrow  stemmed  from  a  Deans’ 
Retreat held a few years ago and, at that time, the Dean of Students generated a report on leadership; 
there was, however, no formal follow-up to that report.  He explained that the idea resurfaced following the 
death of former Alberta Premier Peter Lougheed, when his family approached the University of Alberta to 
provide to the institution the gift of his name to, possibly, an initiative in this area.  He noted that, following 
this  proposal from  the  Lougheed family,  the  University  explored  accepting this  honour  and that  this  had 
pre-dated the University’s current budget climate. 
 
He explained that when he was asked to become involved in the project, it was an easy decision, based on 
his positive experiences as a faculty member at the University of Alberta, combined with the outstanding 
legacy of Premier Lougheed for both the Province of Alberta as well as for the University of Alberta.  He 
noted that he was further inspired by the contents of Dare to Discover as he felt the seeds of an initiative 
with regard to leadership were contained within it.  He stated that he, thus, became officially involved with 
the project in the Spring of 2013. 
 
Dr Meekison reported that during his early consultations surrounding this project, he met with the Deans as 
well as students involved in a leadership pilot project within the Alberta School of Business—the students  
shared  with  him  that  their  best  experience  from  that  program  had  been  their  ability  to  learn  from  one 
another.    He  added  that  the  Deans  voiced  concerns  regarding  financing  and  that  it  was  clear  that  the 
project would be required to be self-financed.   
 
He  concluded  by  stating  that  the  creation  of  the  ‘leadership  college’  would  act  as  a  catalyst  for  student 
leadership  and  partnerships  as  well  as  a  unique  educational  opportunity  that  would  immerse  students 
within a transformational educational experience and that this represents an enormous opportunity for the 
institution.    He  added  that  the  project  has  been  recently  introduced  into  the  public  domain  to  generate 

General Faculties Council 09/16/2013 
Page 9 

 
appropriate and thoughtful discussion on its future. 
 
Dr  Samarasekera  commented  that,  despite  being  inundated  with  requests  to  use  Premier  Lougheed’s 
name following his passing, the Lougheed family had chosen the University of Alberta in partnership with 
the  Banff  Centre  to  bear  his  name—this  came  as  a  great  honour  to  the  institutions.    She  stated  that 
Premier  Lougheed  often  reminisced  about  his  time  at  the  University  of  Alberta  and  enjoyed  appearing 
personally to award each year those scholarships offered in his name.  She cautioned, however, that this 
proposal is in its formative stages and will require discussion and input from the community, including GFC, 
in order to be properly developed. 
 
Members expressed comments and questions in relation to this proposal, including, but not limited to:  an 
expression of opposition to the idea of a leadership college, due to what was perceived as the singular and 
passé  theme  of  leadership;  that  a  leadership  college  would  be  a  misuse  of  funds;  that  funds  could  be 
raised to develop curricula across all Faculties  that would benefit all students as opposed to just a few; 
clarification  about  the  role  of  the  Office  of  Advancement  in  selectively  fundraising  for  this  initiative;  that 
expecting  faculty  to  teach  students  of  the  leadership  college  will  negatively  impact  the  greater  student 
population; whether there is evidence to support the claim that a leadership college would strengthen the 
entire University of Alberta community and student population; that money should be applied to existing 
leadership  initiatives;  that  assurance  is  needed  that  this  initiative  will  not  cost  any  additional  money; 
clarification on if, and when, the Board of Governors will be voting on this proposal; concerns about the use 
of land to build the residential building associated with a leadership college; that some faculty members are 
skeptical  about funding as  well  as  the  residential  aspect  of the  proposal;  that there  needs to be  a  clear 
definition  of  ‘leadership’  before  this  project  goes  forward;  clarification  about  how  the  leadership  college 
would link to citizenship and engagement; clarification about the diversity of opinions offered by the Deans 
during  early  consultation;  that  the  various  themes  within  the  proposed  description  of  this  initiative  have 
different meanings in different Faculties; clarification about how fair access to students will be managed; 
clarification  with  regard  to  the  status  of  students  who  are  not  accepted  into  the  program;  concerns  that 
certain students will not be able to afford the residential experience; concerns that some students may not 
want to live in residence; and commentary there are not enough important details surrounding the project 
for it to progress in a meaningful way at this time. 
 
Dr Samarasekera thanked members for their feedback and questions and stated she and her colleagues 
would bring the proposal back once more details were available and following more extensive community 
engagement. 
 
8. 
 
There were no documents. 
 
Presenters:  Martin  Ferguson-Pell,  Acting  Provost  and  Vice-President  (Academic);  Phyllis  Clark,  Vice-
President (Finance and Administration) 
 
Purpose of the Proposal: For information/discussion. 
 
Discussion: 
In conjunction with a PowerPoint presentation, Acting Provost and Vice-President (Academic) Ferguson-
Pell briefed members on the University Budget 2013-2014, highlighting revenue generation, management 
of expenditures, and mitigation strategies.  He noted that the impact of the Voluntary Severance Program 
(VSP) for continuing academic staff was not yet known. 
 
Vice-President (Finance and Administration) Clark added that there will be cuts across the institution, but 

Information Session on the University Budget 2013/2014 Preliminary Forecast  

General Faculties Council 09/16/2013 
Page 10 

 
they should not be considered horizontal and that they are dependent on benchmarking and performance.  
She stated that she expects these new figures to be represented by an approximate 7% cut to Faculties 
and 10% to 12% cut to central administrative units. 
 
Members  expressed  a  number  of  questions  and  comments  in  relation  to  this  update,  including,  but  not 
limited to:  clarification about the previous announcement that there would not be any more horizontal cuts; 
clarification about the quantity and distribution of student scholarships; clarification about the impact of the 
Association of Academic Staff - University of Alberta (AASUA) grievance concerning the VSP; and whether 
there  is  a  plan  to  communicate  the  negative  effects  of  the  budget  on  institutional  employment  and 
academic programs to the Alberta public. 
 
Dr  Samarasekera  thanked  members  for  their  comments.    She  also  cautioned  student  leaders  to  obtain 
accurate information before approaching the media on some of these issues, as they impact the resources 
and reputation of the institution. 
 
9
9.    Question Period 
. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter:  Indira Samarasekera, President and Chair, General Faculties Council 
 
9.1Q  Question  from  GFC  Member  Mr  Dustin  Chelen  (Students’  Union  Vice-President  (Academic)) 
Regarding the Student Mental Health Initiatives Review  
and 
9.1R  Response  from  Acting  Provost  and  Vice-President  Martin  Ferguson-Pell  to  Question  Raised  by  Mr 
Chelen  
 
9.2Q  Question  from  GFC  Member  Mr  Dustin  Chelen  (Students’  Union  Vice-President  (Academic)) 
Regarding Digital Learning Initiatives Funding Usage  
and 
9.2R Response from President Indira Samarasekera to Question Raised by Mr Chelen  
 
9.3Q  Question  from  GFC  Member  Mr  Dustin  Chelen  (Students’  Union  Vice-President  (Academic)) 
Regarding  Teaching  and  Learning  Resources  and  the  Establishment  of  a  Centralized  “Teaching  and 
Research Unit”  
and 
9.3R Response from President Indira Samarasekera to Question Raised by Mr Chelen  
 
9.4Q  Question  from  GFC  Member  Mr  Dustin  Chelen  (Students’  Union  Vice-President  (Academic)) 
Regarding GFC and Student Involvement in Digital Learning Discussions  
and 
9.4R  Response  from  Acting  Provost  and  Vice-President  Martin  Ferguson-Pell  to  Question  Raised  by  Mr 
Chelen 
 
9.5Q  Question  from  GFC  Member  Mr  Dustin  Chelen  (Students’  Union  Vice-President  (Academic)) 
Regarding Student Involvement in the Open Educational Resources Pilot  
and 
9.5R  Response  from  Acting  Provost  and  Vice-President  Martin  Ferguson-Pell  to  Question  Raised  by  Mr 
Chelen 
 
9.6Q  Question  from  GFC  Member  Mr  Dustin  Chelen  (Students’  Union  Vice-President  (Academic)) 

General Faculties Council 09/16/2013 
Page 11 

 
Regarding ‘Student Connect’  
and 
9.6R Response from Vice-Provost and University Registrar Lisa Collins to Question Raised by Mr Chelen 
 
9.7Q  Question  from  GFC  Member  Mr  Dustin  Chelen  (Students’  Union  Vice-President  (Academic)) 
Regarding the Release of Budget Letters from the Ministry of Enterprise and Advanced Education (EAE)  
and 
9.7R Response from President Indira Samarasekera to Question Raised by Mr Chelen 
 
9.8Q  Question  from  GFC  Member  Mr  Dustin  Chelen  (Students’  Union  Vice-President  (Academic)) 
Regarding Advocacy for a Predictable Funding Model  
and 
9.8R Response from Vice-President (Finance and Administration) Phyllis Clark to Question Raised by Mr 
Chelen 
 
9.9Q Question from GFC Member Mr Petros Kusmu (Students’ Union President) Regarding the Status of a 
Downtown Arts Centre and Engagement Surrounding Planning  
and 
9.9R Response from Vice-President (Facilities and Operations) Don Hickey on behalf of President Indira 
Samarasekera to Question Raised by Mr Kusmu  
 
Discussion: 
Regarding Item 9.4Q, Mr Chelen enquired how student members would be selected to participate in this 
initiative.  Dr Ferguson-Pell replied that the Students’ Union (SU) and the Graduate Students’ Association 
(GSA) should identify potentially-qualified students to participate, but that they must possess a specialty in 
digital learning strategies, and clarified that this would not be a policy-making body. 
 
Regarding Item 9.6R, Ms Collins made note of a typographical error in her response. 
 
Regarding  Item  9.7Q,  Mr  Chelen  enquired  how  a  member  of  GFC  might  request  the  documentation 
referenced  in  this  question  from  the  Board  of  Governors’  Chair,  and  Ms  Haggarty-France,  University 
Secretary, replied that the Board Chair will release the documentation in question at what he deems the 
appropriate time. 
 
Regarding Item 9.8R, Mr Chelen thanked Ms Clark for her response. 
 
Regarding Item 9.9R, Mr Kusmu enquired if students had been consulted in relation to this project, and Mr 
Hickey  replied  that,  if  the  project  moves  forward,  there  will  be  extensive  consultation  with  all  key 
stakeholders. 
 
Mr  Lau  enquired  how  the  international  student  fee  differentials  might  impact  the  international  student 
experience  at  the  University,  and  Ms  Clark  replied  that  no  decisions  have  yet  been  made  regarding  the 
issue of differential fees. 
 
A  student  member  enquired  about  the  status  of  students  who  may  not  be  able  to  attend  GFC  due  to 
scheduled  classes.    Ms  Haggarty-France  replied  that,  for  the  benefit  of  the  wider  University  community, 
GFC and GFC standing committee meeting schedules are published widely with substantial notice.  She 
suggested the member contact her for further assistance, if required. 
 
INFORMATION REPORTS 
 

General Faculties Council 09/16/2013 
Page 12 

 
10.  GFC Executive Committee Minutes of April 26, 2013 and May 6, 2013 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
11.  Report of the Board of Governors of May 10, June 3, and June 21, 2013 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
12.  E-Mail Reports of the GFC Nominating Committee (June 19 and August 2, 2013) 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
13.  E-Mail Report of the GFC Replenishment Committee (July 12, 2013) 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
14. 

Information Items Forwarded to GFC Members Between Meetings 
 
-  2013-14  General  Faculties  Council  (GFC)  and  GFC  Standing  Committee  Meeting  Schedules  [E-
Mailed to Members on September 3, 2013] 

 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
15.  Reports 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There were no reports. 
 
CLOSING SESSION 
 
16.    Adjournment 
 
The Chair adjourned the meeting at 4:25 pm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R:\GO05 General Faculties Council - Committees\GEN\13-14\SE-16\Minutes\Final-Minutes.docx